An Analysis of the Public Financial Management Act 2016 with the PEFA Framework 
In 2016, the parliament of the Republic of Ghana passed the Public Financial Management 
(PFM) Act. The purpose of the Act is to determine the responsibilities of officials accountable for 
managing public finances, improve the effectiveness of financial management, and increase the 
transparency of public funds. This paper aims to analyze the PFM Act in accordance with the PEFA 
framework, which is used to define the weaknesses and strengths of public financial management in 
a particular country. This framework consists of seven pillars: budget reliability, public finance 
transparency, management of assets and liabilities, policy-based budgeting, control and 
predictability in budget execution, accounting and reporting, and external scrutiny and audit (PEFA, 
n.d.). This paper will evaluate the PFM Act in all these seven dimensions to see how this Act 
contributes to the more efficient management of public finances.

          Budget Credibility

The budget credibility dimension is intended to assess whether the budget is reasonable and 
is executed as planned. The PFM Act contributes to the development of a realistic budget and its 
proper implementation. For example, section 21 of the PFM Act (2016) provides guidance on how 
the annual budget should be prepared, sets the timeframe within which it should be created, and 
defines officials responsible for the procedure. Subsection 5 of section 21 of the PFM Act (2916), in 
particular, ensures the feasibility of the annual budget, requiring it to be based on “sound analysis 
and forecasts of macro-economic developments and fiscal projections” (p. 18). Further, sections 27 
and 30 are directly related to budget implementation since they oblige accountable officials to report 
on the performance linked to the budget execution. Thus, the PFM Act ensures that the government 
budget is feasible and is executed according to the government’s plans.
