      Policy-Based Budgeting 

This element of the PEFA framework is concerned with the way the government’s budget 
and fiscal strategy are prepared. These documents should be developed with regard to the 
government’s strategic plans, fiscal policies, and proper macroeconomic and financial forecasts 
(PEFA, n.d.). The PFM Act (2016) provides a legal framework to help the government of Ghana 
meet this PEFA requirement. In particular, the Act stipulates that the Fiscal Strategy Document 
should include an updated macroeconomic and fiscal projection aligned with the country’s 
economic policies. In addition, the government’s annual budget should be based on a range of 
forecasts, which include revenues, macroeconomic developments, economic trends, and cash flows. 
Furthermore, section 15 requires the Fiscal Strategy Document to include the medium-term fiscal 
planning, which is also necessary to follow the PEFA guidelines. Thus, the PFM Act is intended to 
help Ghana ensure that its public financial management aligns with its fiscal policies and economic 
forecasts. 

   		Control and Predictability in Budget Implementation 

This dimension is related to the efficiency of budget implementation. It involves such 
aspects as collecting and reporting government revenues, managing public servants’ payroll, 
procurement management, and internal audit (PEFA, n.d.). Regarding this pillar, section 47 of the 
PFM Act (2016) regulates how government funds are collected, deposited, and retained. In terms of 
procurement management, the PFM Act’s section 96 specifies offenses that can be committed by 
individuals employed in this field and penalties for such offenses. With regard to an internal audit, 
section 7 appoints the Principal Spending Officer responsible for this procedure, and section 83 
outlines how the process of the internal audit should be performed. Overall, the PFM Act establishes 
a thorough system of internal control to make sure that the budget is executed according to the 
plans.
